Okazaki!
[Tomoya] Oh hey, good morning.
Hope you're hungry.
Wow, thanks.
Don't tell me you stayed
up all night working?
Are you kidding? I went home
right after you guys.
Um, if you don't mind,
we were thinking about
skipping school today
so we could help you
out with the yard work.
Well, I appreciate
the thought and all,
but it might look bad
for the school
if we have two class reps
skip out on the same day.
Kotomi!
[Kyou] Are you sleeping okay?
Are you eating okay?
We're all really looking forward
to your birthday this weekend,
so I hope you're feeling
better by then!
[Kyou] I don't know, guys.
Do you think she's really okay?
Alright, guess I'll
see you tomorrow.
You have to promise me you
two won't push yourselves
too hard, okay?
Alright, I promise.
You have a safe trip home.
Do you really think we'll be
able to finish the yard work
by tomorrow?
Yeah, no sweat. I'm planning
on working through the night
so I'll have plenty of time.
[Nagisa] In that case-
[Tomoya] No way!
But I haven't even
said anything yet.
[Tomoya] But you were going
to say you'd stay and help
me, right?
No way. If you got sick
or something,
I bet your dad
would totally flip out
and take out a
restraining order against me.
[Nagisa] But weren't you working
late last night too?
I don't want you
to get sick either.
[Tomoya] I'll be fine. It's
nothing compared to what the
basketball team put me through.
I'll take your word for it,
but if you ever need any help,
you just let me know and I
promise I'll come running, okay?
[Tomoya] Man, I'm really beat.
Kotomi...
[Tomoya] I hope you're
all right.
We're all worried
about you, you know.
[man] The universe is not just
that which we can see.
When this world was developing
its ideal shape and form,
a microscopic dimension
was sealed away.
A hidden world exists.
A hidden world, he says...
Hmm...
Guess I made it in time
after all.
If I read this book now,
she wouldn't mind, would she?
"The day before, a rabbit."
"Yesterday, a deer."
I get it. So, those lines she
said were from this book.
[yawning]
[young Kotomi] The day before
yesterday, I saw a rabbit.
Yesterday, it was a deer.
And today, it was you.
Oh man, where am I?
[rustle]
[door opening]
I've never seen you here before.
What are you doing in my yard?
I was playing around here
and just wandered in.
Anyway, what's your name?
Kotomi, written in three
hiragana characters.
But you can call
me Kotomi-chan.
Oh, Kotomi, who's your
cute little friend?
[Tomoya] That was how
I first met Kotomi.
[young Kotomi] Well,
shall we eat?
My pleasure!
[young Kotomi] This one
is a California poppy.
And this one over here
is a pansy.
Wow...
Kotomi, it's such a nice day,
why don't the two of you
play outside instead?
But this is outside.
[giggling]
No, sweetie,
outside is on the other side
of those hedges.
There are all sorts of exciting
places to explore out there,
and all sorts of new
things to see.
I don't wanna, it's scary.
The day before yesterday,
I saw a rabbit.
Yesterday, it was a deer.
And today, it's you.
[Tomoya] Kotomi didn't like
to go out much.
The furthest she would go
was her yard.
As far as I knew, she never
had any friends over either.
Hey, when you have your
big birthday party,
is it okay if I invite some
of my friends over too?
[hesitation]
Aw, come on.
I bet everyone would
love to come here
and make friends with you.
[young Tomoya] It'll be fun,
I promise.
[hesitation]
[boy a] Huh? A birthday party
for some girl I don't even know?
[boy b] Yeah, I don't know if
I want to be seen going to
a girl's birthday party.
[laughing]
[Tomoya] After what I said,
I was so ashamed to show up
at her party alone.
I lost my nerve when I made
it to her yard.
[hurried footsteps]
By the time I finally built up
the courage to go see her,
it was already midnight.
But that didn't matter to me.
I had to apologize to her
no matter what.
[young Tomoya] Huh?
[crying]
Kotomi-chan!
[young Kotomi] I burned
it, Tomoya.
I burned Mommy
and Daddy's thesis...
I'm so bad!
You didn't burn the thesis.
It's all right,
you don't have to cry now.
That folder was for you,
not for your parents' research.
[Tomoya] After that,
I never saw Kotomi again.
No matter how many times
I stopped by her house,
she never came to the
window to see me.
The day when I met her
for the first time,
the afternoons we spent
playing in her backyard,
as time passed, they began to
feel like nothing but a dream.
And like a dream,
before I knew it,
I had forgotten that any
of it had ever happened.
[young Kotomi] I've never
seen you here before.
What are you doing in my yard?
Are you finally awake?
I don't know. It feels like
I might still be dreaming.
The boy who wandered
into my yard...
I could never forget him,
even after all these years.
In the end, I don't know if he
ever understood my feelings,
but I always cared
for him very much.
Because even if he
forgot about me,
he was my first and only friend.
That's why...
I've been waiting for him.
Kotomi...
The day before yesterday,
I saw a rabbit.
Yesterday, it was a deer.
And today, it's you.
[Kotomi] My Tomoya.
[sniffling]
I'm here for you.
Everyone can't wait
to see you again!
[Kotomi] The sky...
it's so beautiful.
[Tomoya] Yeah...
There she is!
Good morning, Kotomi.
We all missed you!
Welcome back, Kotomi.
[Tomoya] Good morning, Kotomi.
It's nice to see everyone again.
[Kotomi] Were you all
waiting for me?
Of course!
After all,
we've got to celebrate
your birthday, right?
[Kotomi] My birthday.
Right.
[giggling]
And as for your present,
this will have to do for now.
[Kyou] Here.
Violin gift certificate?
It's actually the violin from
before that you like so much.
We were hoping that we'd be
able to give it to you today,
but it got kind of roughed up.
We found a music shop
that said they can fix it,
but it looks like the repairs
might take a while.
As soon as it's ready,
you can trade your coupon
for the real thing,
so try to hold on until then.
Thanks you guys.
[teacher] Ichinose!
Oh, it's good to see you.
I'm glad you're feeling up
to coming back to school.
Thank you and
good morning, ma'am.
Good morning.
Oh, by the way,
your guardian called
and said he's stopping
by today to pay you a visit.
I think he has something
important to give to you.
Come on, don't worry about it.
After all, he's really not as
bad as you make him out to be.
[Tomoya] But, you already
know that, right?
How about we have him come
to the Drama Club room?
If we do that, you won't be
so nervous around him, right?
You don't have to be scared.
We'll be with you.
We can do it together,
right Kotomi?
Okay...
[door opening]
Hello, Kotomi...
Thanks for coming. I'm sorry if
you had to go out of your way.
Please, think nothing of it,
I'm happy to be here.
[Kotomi] Father's briefcase...
[gasp]
[man] It arrived late last night
at the research laboratory.
It belonged to Dr. Ichinose
without a doubt.
I opened it myself
to confirm it.
Once I saw what was inside,
I knew I had to bring it to
you as soon as possible.
Do you mean you
found the thesis?
[man] Open it and see.
It's all right, we're here
for you, Kotomi.
Yeah, he's right.
Come on, you can do it!
[gasp]
So, do you know what it says?
You think I can read English?
Let me see...
It says something like
"If you find this suitcase..."
[Kotomi] "...please take it
to our daughter."
At the bottom,
it's signed K and M.
[man] In this case, K and M are
the initials of Kotaro Ichinose
and Mizue Ichinose.
In other words,
Kotomi's parents.
They always signed their joint
research theses that way.
And this looks just like
Father's handwriting.
It must've gotten lost at
sea after the plane crash.
Who knows how long it
drifted out there?
[man] It may have taken years
for it to wash ashore.
Eventually, I imagine someone
found it, read the letter,
and passed it on to
someone else.
It probably continued like
this for quite some time,
passing from hand to hand,
from country to country...
[man] That suitcase has gone
on a long journey to arrive
here today.
Even the bear looks like it's
been handled quite a bit.
Who knows how many people have
taken care of it over the years?
You probably still don't know
what was in that envelope
you burned, do you?
I'm sure you would be relieved
to know the truth.
You mean, it wasn't Mother
and Father's thesis?
The truth is, a secondary copy
of that thesis never existed.
[man] Your father was making
revisions to it up until the
very last minute.
I'm sure he didn't have time
to make a copy before the trip.
Then, what was inside
the envelope I burned?
The truth is, it was a catalog
of stuffed animals
so they could pick out the
perfect teddy bear for
your birthday.
[man] Until today, you probably
wouldn't have believed me even
if I had told you.
But this bear here, doesn't seem
so farfetched.
I still remember what
he said to me:
"For the first time,
my little daughter told me what
she wanted for her birthday."
[man] It was something so
simple, but when he said that,
his face lit up with joy.
But wait, the bear and note
weren't the only things
in the suitcase, right?
What about Mother
and Father's thesis?
You have it right there.
[Kotomi] "To Kotomi...
Even if your life is full
of tears and sorrow,
this world is still
a beautiful place."
This is Father's handwriting...
And this is Mom's...
[man] Although this suitcase
may have held their thesis
at some point,
somewhere along the way,
your mother and father
decided to replace it
with something they thought
was more important.
Your parents were striving
to find the purest,
most beautiful way to describe
how this world was formed.
I like to believe that what you
see before you is their answer.
[man] And to be honest,
never before have I seen words
as beautiful and eloquent
as those written in that letter.
Until the very end,
your parents thought only
of your happiness,
and cherished nothing greater
than your love.
[Kotomi] Mother, Father...
I've been waiting
all this time.
I've been alone for as long
as I could remember.
But just when I thought I had
nothing else in this world,
when I thought that all
I could do was cry,
Tomoya came to rescue me.
So, you don't have to
worry about me anymore.
I'm finally happy now.
Very, very happy...
So now...
Now I can finally say it.
Welcome back, Mom.
Welcome back, Dad.
I've missed you both so much.
[Tomoya] That suitcase has
traveled on a long journey,
and seen every corner
of the world.
From sun-parched deserts to
frozen cities buried in snow...
From high mountain tops
to rolling green valleys...
From one hand to another,
it was entrusted with care,
until it could finally reach
its destination.
[Kotaro] If you find this
suitcase, please take it
to our daughter.
[Kotaro] To Kotomi...
Even if your life is full
of tears and sorrow,
this world is still
a beautiful place.
Open your eyes and
see it for yourself.
Do what you want to do.
Be who you want to be.
Find friends to share the good
and the bad with you.
Enjoy life. Don't be in
a hurry to grow up.
[Mizue] We found this bear at
a souvenir shop at the airport.
We looked all over and this
was the biggest one we
could find.
I hope you like it.
I'm sorry we didn't have
time to mail it back to
you right away.
[Mizue] To our cute
little Kotomi...
[both] Happy birthday!
We love you.
You made it! Thanks for coming.
It's our pleasure!
We invited Sunohara
and Miyazawa too.
They're picking up some
food for us right now.
I hope you don't mind,
but I went ahead and invited
my mom and dad, too.
Once everyone else shows up,
we can open presents and stuff
like that.
[Kotomi] Sounds good. I made
some dessert  for us, too.
And knowing you, you probably
made too much again.
[giggle]
[Kyou] Yeah, but it's a party,
so you're supposed
to have too much.
Besides, I invited
a lot of people.
It'll be a big deal
just like the concert.
Ah, hey! Don't you think
you might be over doing
it a little bit?
I mean, are you sure they're
going to all fit?
[giggle]
I'm sure it'll all be fine.
[Kotomi] After all,
I have a big backyard.
Basketball's lucky, huh?
Sounds like you're reading
Okazaki's fortune instead
of mine.
Isn't this kind of pointless?
[Tomoya] All right,
I'll tell you the truth.
Huh?
[Nagisa] I'm sorry,
I was trying not to cry...
Sunohara...
What a pain.
So, what's the plan now?
Come on, don't tell me you're
going to give up without
a fight, Nagisa.